**Heritability_calculations-using causal Transcriptome Wide Analysis**

**Author:** Johannes I. Ottensmeier, La Jolla Institute for Immunology / University of California San Diego

(Vijayanand Lab - La Jolla, CA 92037, USA)

*********

**Please refer to cTWAS developer citations below:**

This repo contains scripts that wrap causal cTWAS functions from:

**Single Group cTWAS**

Zhao, S., Crouse, W., Qian, S. et al. Adjusting for genetic confounders in transcriptome-wide association studies improves discovery of risk genes of complex traits. Nat Genet 56, 336–347 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-023-01648-9

**Multi Group cTWAS**

Integrating multi-omics and multi-context QTL data with GWAS reveals the genetic architecture of complex traits and improves the discovery of risk genes
Sheng Qian, Kaixuan Luo, Xiaotong Sun, Wesley Crouse, Lifan Liang, Jing Gu, Matthew Stephens, Siming Zhao, Xin He
medRxiv 2025.12.19.25342620; doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.19.25342620

*********

**A detailed manual for the implementation of this tool can be found in the authors' GitHub (multi Group):**

https://xinhe-lab.github.io/multigroup_ctwas/

**This repo**

The codes in this repo wraps native cTWAS (multi-group) functions to permit streamlined processing inputs for the following steps:

1) GWAS study harmonisation with LD panels.
2) Harmonisation of molecular QTL prediction models with GWAS studies and LD panels.
3) Running the cTWAS analysis.
4) Aggregating output data and calculating heritability.

As a note - even though we are uisng the multi-group code, we have opted to process molecular QTL prediction models implementing a single tissue appraoch, meaning that a single tissue is processed per GWAS study for each cTWAS script run.

*********

**Heritability as a readout:**

This repository contains wrapper scripts to process data using the cTWAS tool, allowing the user to compute the contribution of genetic effects mediated by molecular phenotypes to the phenotypic variance calculated in a GWAS study. This implementation of cTWAS utilises the prior probability and prior group variance generated by the expectation–maximisation algorithm, along with group size (computed in the 4_cTWAS_Runner script), to estimate the percentage variance explained (computed in the 5_summarise script).

The percentage variance explained by a molecular phenotype is then divided by the total percentage variance explained (by molecular trait–mediated effects and unexplained genetic effects) to obtain the proportion of heritability that can be attributed to a molecular trait. These scripts run one molecular trait and one GWAS study at a time, essentially implementing the cTWAS single-tissue modality.

*********

**------ Repo Contents ------**

--- Directories ---

**- /Heritability/cTWAS/config/**
 
**config.yaml**

   - Configuration file for Snakemake.

**meta_gtex_49.tsv**

  - Metadata for telling Snakemake which GWAS–molecular trait prediction model combinations need to be run. This file provides necessary wildcards to the Snakefile. Additionally, GWAS_n needs to be listed here for heritability calculations.

**- /Heritability/cTWAS/envs/**

  **ctwas.yaml**
  
  - cTWAS dependencies to be installed by mamba.

  **SnakeMake.yaml**
  
  - A separate Snakemake environment needs to be created due to dependency conflicts when installed in the cTWAS environment.

**- /Heritability/cTWAS/scripts/**

  Relevant cTWAS wrapper scripts written in R. Please refer to the script_params.md file for more information.

**- /Heritability/cTWAS/shell/**

  - **/shell/jobs/**
  
    **Test.sh**
      .sh file for running the Snakefile configured to Herman cluster settings.

  - **/shell/MANUAL_SLURM_ARRAY/**
  
    Individual .sh files for running each R wrapper script manually if needed.
    
    e.g. **1_prepare_reference.sh**
    
    Each file is configured to Herman cluster settings.
    
    Each .sh also corresponds to a Snakefile rule.

  - **/shell/profiles/**
  
    Files for configuring the Snakemake pipeline on a Herman cluster.
    
    **config.yaml**
    
    **slurm-jobscript.sh**
    
    **status-sacct.sh**

**- /Heritability/cTWAS/Snakefile**

  Snakemake file for running cTWAS.

*********

**------ Environment Set Up: ------**

1.- Please install mamba / micromamba onto your local / cluster account:

  mamba
  https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/mamba-installation.html

  micromamba
  https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/micromamba-installation.html

2.- Clone this repository.

3.- Move to this repo's directory

```bash
cd /Heritability/cTWAS
```

4.- Create environment

```bash
mamba env create -f ./envs/ctwas.yml
mamba activate ctwas
```

5.- Navigate to the cTWAS developer's GitHub - https://github.com/xinhe-lab/ctwas/tree/multigroup

Follow installation instructions (ensure that you are in the ctwas mamba environment)

Code provided by cTWAS developers (Xinhe lab) below.

When executing this command please be sure to be in the ctwas mamba environment.

```bash
install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("xinhe-lab/ctwas",ref = "multigroup")
```

6.- Create Snakemake environment

```bash
mamba env create -f ./envs/SnakeMake.yaml
```

*********

**------ Set Up Instructions ------**

This repository consists of wrapper scripts to process data using the cTWAS tool.
Three inputs are required:

WARNING - user must ensure that SNPIDs are consistent amonst all three file types. E.g. If RSID used in LD reference panels, GWAS data and prediction model files must also contain RSID information.

1) GWAS data
   (Must be in VCF, TSV, or CSV format)
   For readily available GWAS, refer to the IEU OpenGWAS project:
   https://opengwas.io/

2) Weights from prediction models (e.g. PrediXcan), or QTL summary statistics saved in .db format.
   Must be in .db format as prepared by PrediXcan.
   For readily available prediction models, refer to:
   GTEx v8 models on eQTL and sQTL
   https://predictdb.org/post/2021/07/21/gtex-v8-models-on-eqtl-and-sqtl/

3) LD matrices
   Please note LD structure is critical for cTWAS. Due to imputation of GWAS weights from prediction model statistics, and causality being tested per haploblock, it is important to match LD information to the GWAS data.

   (GWAS, model, and LD should be matched at the population level.)

   For EUR LD matrices, refer to:
   https://uchicago.app.box.com/s/jqocacd2fulskmhoqnasrknbt59x3xkn
